Part 9

Let us go on to treat of the region which follows next in order 
after this and which immediately surrounds the earth. It is the region 
common to water and air, and the processes attending the formation of water 
above take place in it. We must consider the principles and causes of all 
these phenomena too as before. The efficient and chief and first cause 
is the circle in which the sun moves. For the sun as it approaches or recedes, 
obviously causes dissipation and condensation and so gives rise to generation 
and destruction. Now the earth remains but the moisture surrounding it 
is made to evaporate by the sun's rays and the other heat from above, and 
rises. But when the heat which was raising it leaves it, in part dispersing 
to the higher region, in part quenched through rising so far into the upper 
air, then the vapour cools because its heat is gone and because the place 
is cold, and condenses again and turns from air into water. And after the 
water has formed it falls down again to the earth.
The exhalation of water is vapour: air condensing into water is 
cloud. Mist is what is left over when a cloud condenses into water, and 
is therefore rather a sign of fine weather than of rain; for mist might 
be called a barren cloud. So we get a circular process that follows the 
course of the sun. For according as the sun moves to this side or that, 
the moisture in this process rises or falls. We must think of it as a river 
flowing up and down in a circle and made up partly of air, partly of water. 
When the sun is near, the stream of vapour flows upwards; when it recedes, 
the stream of water flows down: and the order of sequence, at all events, 
in this process always remains the same. So if 'Oceanus' had some secret 
meaning in early writers, perhaps they may have meant this river that flows 
in a circle about the earth.
So the moisture is always raised by the heat and descends to the 
earth again when it gets cold. These processes and, in some cases, their 
varieties are distinguished by special names. When the water falls in small 
drops it is called a drizzle; when the drops are larger it is 
rain.

Part 10

Some of the vapour that is formed by day does not rise high because 
the ratio of the fire that is raising it to the water that is being raised 
is small. When this cools and descends at night it is called dew and hoar-frost. 
When the vapour is frozen before it has condensed to water again it is 
hoar-frost; and this appears in winter and is commoner in cold places. 
It is dew when the vapour has condensed into water and the heat is not 
so great as to dry up the moisture that has been raised nor the cold sufficient 
(owing to the warmth of the climate or season) for the vapour itself to 
freeze. For dew is more commonly found when the season or the place is 
warm, whereas the opposite, as has been said, is the case with hoar-frost. 
For obviously vapour is warmer than water, having still the fire that raised 
it: consequently more cold is needed to freeze it.
Both dew and hoar-frost are found when the sky is clear and there 
is no wind. For the vapour could not be raised unless the sky were clear, 
and if a wind were blowing it could not condense.
The fact that hoar-frost is not found on mountains contributes 
to prove that these phenomena occur because the vapour does not rise high. 
One reason for this is that it rises from hollow and watery places, so 
that the heat that is raising it, bearing as it were too heavy a burden 
cannot lift it to a great height but soon lets it fall again. A second 
reason is that the motion of the air is more pronounced at a height, and 
this dissolves a gathering of this kind.
Everywhere, except in Pontus, dew is found with south winds and 
not with north winds. There the opposite is the case and it is found with 
north winds and not with south. The reason is the same as that which explains 
why dew is found in warm weather and not in cold. For the south wind brings 
warm, and the north, wintry weather. For the north wind is cold and so 
quenches the heat of the evaporation. But in Pontus the south wind does 
not bring warmth enough to cause evaporation, whereas the coldness of the 
north wind concentrates the heat by a sort of recoil, so that there is 
more evaporation and not less. This is a thing which we can often observe 
in other places too. Wells, for instance, give off more vapour in a north 
than in a south wind. Only the north winds quench the heat before any considerable 
quantity of vapour has gathered, while in a south wind the evaporation 
is allowed to accumulate.
Water, once formed, does not freeze on the surface of the earth, 
in the way that it does in the region of the clouds.

Part 11

From the latter there fall three bodies condensed by cold, namely 
rain, snow, hail. Two of these correspond to the phenomena on the lower 
level and are due to the same causes, differing from them only in degree 
and quantity.
Snow and hoar-frost are one and the same thing, and so are rain 
and dew: only there is a great deal of the former and little of the latter. 
For rain is due to the cooling of a great amount of vapour, for the region 
from which and the time during which the vapour is collected are considerable. 
But of dew there is little: for the vapour collects for it in a single 
day and from a small area, as its quick formation and scanty quantity 
show.
The relation of hoar-frost and snow is the same: when cloud freezes 
there is snow, when vapour freezes there is hoar-frost. Hence snow is a 
sign of a cold season or country. For a great deal of heat is still present 
and unless the cold were overpowering it the cloud would not freeze. For 
there still survives in it a great deal of the heat which caused the moisture 
to rise as vapour from the earth.
Hail on the other hand is found in the upper region, but the corresponding 
phenomenon in the vaporous region near the earth is lacking. For, as we 
said, to snow in the upper region corresponds hoar-frost in the lower, 
and to rain in the upper region, dew in the lower. But there is nothing 
here to correspond to hail in the upper region. Why this is so will be 
clear when we have explained the nature of hail.

Part 12

But we must go on to collect the facts bearing on the origin of 
it, both those which raise no difficulties and those which seem 
paradoxical.
Hail is ice, and water freezes in winter; yet hailstorms occur 
chiefly in spring and autumn and less often in the late summer, but rarely 
in winter and then only when the cold is less intense. And in general hailstorms 
occur in warmer, and snow in colder places. Again, there is a difficulty 
about water freezing in the upper region. It cannot have frozen before 
becoming water: and water cannot remain suspended in the air for any space 
of time. Nor can we say that the case is like that of particles of moisture 
which are carried up owing to their small size and rest on the iar (the 
water swimming on the air just as small particles of earth and gold often 
swim on water). In that case large drops are formed by the union of many 
small, and so fall down. This cannot take place in the case of hail, since 
solid bodies cannot coalesce like liquid ones. Clearly then drops of that 
size were suspended in the air or else they could not have been so large 
when frozen.
Some think that the cause and origin of hail is this. The cloud 
is thrust up into the upper atmosphere, which is colder because the reflection 
of the sun's rays from the earth ceases there, and upon its arrival there 
the water freezes. They think that this explains why hailstorms are commoner 
in summer and in warm countries; the heat is greater and it thrusts the 
clouds further up from the earth. But the fact is that hail does not occur 
at all at a great height: yet it ought to do so, on their theory, just 
as we see that snow falls most on high mountains. Again clouds have often 
been observed moving with a great noise close to the earth, terrifying 
those who heard and saw them as portents of some catastrophe. Sometimes, 
too, when such clouds have been seen, without any noise, there follows 
a violent hailstorm, and the stones are of incredible size, and angular 
in shape. This shows that they have not been falling for long and that 
they were frozen near to the earth, and not as that theory would have it. 
Moreover, where the hailstones are large, the cause of their freezing must 
be present in the highest degree: for hail is ice as every one can see. 
Now those hailstones are large which are angular in shape. And this shows 
that they froze close to the earth, for those that fall far are worn away 
by the length of their fall and become round and smaller in 
size.
It clearly follows that the congelation does not take place because 
the cloud is thrust up into the cold upper region.
Now we see that warm and cold react upon one another by recoil. 
Hence in warm weather the lower parts of the earth are cold and in a frost 
they are warm. The same thing, we must suppose, happens in the air, so 
that in the warmer seasons the cold is concentrated by the surrounding 
heat and causes the cloud to go over into water suddenly. (For this reason 
rain-drops are much larger on warm days than in winter, and showers more 
violent. A shower is said to be more violent in proportion as the water 
comes down in a body, and this happens when the condensation takes place 
quickly,-though this is just the opposite of what Anaxagoras says. He says 
that this happens when the cloud has risen into the cold air; whereas we 
say that it happens when the cloud has descended into the warm air, and 
that the more the further the cloud has descended). But when the cold has 
been concentrated within still more by the outer heat, it freezes the water 
it has formed and there is hail. We get hail when the process of freezing 
is quicker than the descent of the water. For if the water falls in a certain 
time and the cold is sufficient to freeze it in less, there is no difficulty 
about its having frozen in the air, provided that the freezing takes place 
in a shorter time than its fall. The nearer to the earth, and the more 
suddenly, this process takes place, the more violent is the rain that results 
and the larger the raindrops and the hailstones because of the shortness 
of their fall. For the same reason large raindrops do not fall thickly. 
Hail is rarer in summer than in spring and autumn, though commoner than 
in winter, because the air is drier in summer, whereas in spring it is 
still moist, and in autumn it is beginning to grow moist. It is for the 
same reason that hailstorms sometimes occur in the late summer as we have 
said.
The fact that the water has previously been warmed contributes 
to its freezing quickly: for so it cools sooner. Hence many people, when 
they want to cool hot water quickly, begin by putting it in the sun. So 
the inhabitants of Pontus when they encamp on the ice to fish (they cut 
a hole in the ice and then fish) pour warm water round their reeds that 
it may freeze the quicker, for they use the ice like lead to fix the reeds. 
Now it is in hot countries and seasons that the water which forms soon 
grows warm.
It is for the same reason that rain falls in summer and not in 
winter in Arabia and Ethiopia too, and that in torrents and repeatedly 
on the same day. For the concentration or recoil due to the extreme heat 
of the country cools the clouds quickly.
So much for an account of the nature and causes of rain, dew, snow, 
hoar-frost, and hail.


